---
{"dg-publish":true,"permalink":"/what-makes-slay-the-spire-fun/","created":"2024-01-31T22:17:30.332+09:00","updated":"2024-01-31T22:38:15.773+09:00"}
---

# What makes Slay the Spire fun

#game #analysis

I want to know why I have so much fun playing Slay the Spire. To be honest, I have much more fun playing that game than Elden Ring. For me, Elden Ring is a game that requires patience and rewards exploration. I have patience, but I am not one for exploring that much. I liked the exploration in Tunic, but Hollow Night had too much exploration for me. I know that I like hard games too, because I enjoyed Armored Core 6 and Sekiro. But none of these games have the addicting and time melting quality that Slay the Spire has. Why do I have so much fun playing this game, so much so that I want to stop writing and just play?

One aspect is variety and the speed of iteration. Slay the Spire lets me abandon my run at any time (which I don't do too much) ([[Not changing past notes\|Not changing past notes]]), and even if the build I am going for in the run is not what I want, I can still morph it to something new and exciting. It's a super active game, in the micro decisions and the macro build defining decisions. I get to test out my builds quickly too. Enemy encounters happen often. This same iterative quality is in Celeste and Sekiro, both games where I got addicted to the quick iteration ([[Quantity over quality\|Quantity over quality]]).

Another aspect is the randomness and my ability to make decisions afterwards. Most cards in this game don't have a random quality to them—the only one I can think of right now is the bouncing poison card (from the first 2 classes). That doesn't mean there isn't randomness in this game; in fact, almost every decision is made after a random choice. That's one of the reasons why this game is exciting, but (somewhat) fair. We can't control the random outcomes. But we get to choose the outcome we want from the (usually) 3 choices we get. This type of randomness has a great balance of creating content through randomness, but giving the player agency to play the game how they want to play it. Games like Baulder's Gate have randomness through dice rolls that we can't control. This can be exciting, as life is filled with random events that we can't control the outcome for. But it can be frustrating. Letting the player choose after random choice is an easy way to create a lot of content, while not making the player feel overwhelmed by randomness.

The third aspect is difficulty. The first class is easy, because of the healing after each encounter. It lets me play with my health that the other classes don't allow for. The rogue class is hard to play, and tedious in my opinion. In my past play-throughs it's been my least favorite class. I like the poison build, but the shiv low-cost card build is tedious to click and the discard build I have to think about things a little too much. Other than that, I have no complaints about the base difficulty. The game is hard enough that getting a full run feels great, but I don't feel like a failure until about right before the second level boss. Making the game easier is usually better game design in my opinion. Tough games, like Sekiro, Celeste, and Getting Over It, not only have a narrative around it's difficulty, but have systems to make that difficulty fun. Sekiro is all about the feeling of competence through overcoming struggle. Celeste has the quickest respawn of any game I know. Getting Over It is an absurd game about getting over a difficult mountain (we play it for the difficulty). If the game isn't centered around the difficulty and getting over it, then it's better to stick to the easier side of things, like Slay the Spire does for the first 2/3 of any run.
